---
layout: chapter
title: Five VALUES I would Definitely Develop in My Child
permalink: five-values
---

My friend Sridhar has been behind me with this question - what are the CORE VALUES one should develop in one's child? Just yesterday a father in geniekids told a lie to his child who was unwilling to leave, "Uncle is closing office, so let’s go" - which wasn't true! What is the point of developing conventional values if we are all going to anyway follow them out-of-convenience later? So what values will I teach my child?

Here is my FIVE MUST-HAVE list:

1. The value of Experimentation (or Trying)

I will let my child, who is a born experimenter, keep trying different things in life. The more the child tries, the more the child explores. The more the child explores that more the child learns. The more the child learns, the more the child gathers raw material and tools for life! I will let him fail and treat every failure with as much regard as success and just keep trying. I will encourage her to try different solutions to a problem. I will ‘sell’ flexibility as the key to effectiveness.

The kind of questions I will ask to develop experimentation:
 what are the different ways  you  can do this? How else can you do this? What other kind of experiences you would want? What all have  you learnt from this failure / success? What else can we explore? In what other ways can this give different results?

I2. The value of Consciousness (or feelings)
I would teach my child to be conscious of his or her feelings. Let the child’s awareness of her feelings be a guide to what she should  and  should not do. Our emotions and their manifestations on our body are very transparent and straightforward. Hence, if she is aware of her feelings, her behaviour becomes more regulated and her days become more rewarding and joyous.


The kind of questions I will ask to develop consciousness:
How are you feeling? What part of your body is telling you something? In what ways can you listen to your body? When you feel like this , what are the things you can do? What are the different feelings produced by different kinds of people, different situations, things etc.

3. The value of Reflection (or thought)
John Dewey said, “We do not learn from our actions or from our experiences unless we think about them. When my child thinks through a situation, when she reflects back on what she did and when she introspects as to what happened – She learns “how-to-learn”. She learns to make better decisions; she learns to progress and grow; she develops WISDOM.


The kind of questions I will ask to develop reflection:
What are your thoughts related to ….? What do we learn from this? What was important here and what was not important? What can be or were some of the consequences of what you did? What kind of results do you like (or dislike) and how did you get those results? What do you think was right and what was not right? 

4.The value of Openness (or being non-judgmental)
We stop our thinking, we limit ourselves, when we form opinions, when we make assumptions, when we jump to conclusions, when we have preconceived notions and mental blocks about things and people, including ourselves.  I will teach my child to open multiple pathways of growth and happiness, so that she moves away from good or bad,  right or wrong, from judgments; and rather works from the objective of being effective and constantly improving through being flexible.

The kind of questions I will ask to develop openness:
What are the  beliefs you operated from / you have, about this? How are these beliefs limiting you? What kind of judgments  have you made about others / about yourself? What  could happen if you had opposite views about this / people / yourself?

5. The value of Strengths (or passion)
We can't possibly cut effectively from the blunt side of our knife. There is also little point in trying to sharpen the blunt edge. I would rather my child sharpens her sharp edge, to make it more incisive. Then with minimum effort she can create maximum effect. I will remind her that, if you spend too much time working on your weaknesses, all you end up with, is a lot of strong weaknesses. Instead, I will teach her the value of constantly working on her strengths, of sharpening the axe before chopping the wood..

The kind of questions I will ask to develop strengths:
What are the different strengths you posses? In what ways have these strengths helped you? What are the strengths you used in doing this? In what ways can you make your strengths stronger? How can you make up for your weaknesses through your strengths?

Traditional values tend to preach the child what is right or what is wrong? On one side they teach morality, but on the other side they learn operating out of convenience. So more than trying to impose values like honesty, loyalty, humility, justice, respect etc, I would rather teach my children the above five and let them experience, understand and choose whichever values they want to use to lead their own life with honour and happiness.

Let me sum it up with a quote by Osho – Rajneesh:  

“I say over and over again that if you want your children to know the truth you must give them the chance to think creatively. Stop conditioning them with beliefs; allow them to understand things for themselves. Creativity will become their capacity for life; creativity will become their wisdom. That capacity and that wisdom will lead them to the uncharted sea of truth”.
