---
layout: chapter
title: "Bholu the Bear - Part Two"
permalink: bholu2
category: self esteem
published: true
---

One day Bholu (the bear) told his parents, "Once I grow up, I want to be a NOBODY!"

His worried parents, asked, "Why?"

Because the other day Mr Parrot was very upset with the mango tree which has no fruit this year. He said to him, "What's the use of being a mango tree if it can't give mangoes".

"But it would give mangoes next year!" assured father bear.

"And what if it doesn't?" joined in Uncle Bade in the discussion.

"Yes", said an excited Bholu, "What if it is never able to bear mango fruits, ever again?"

"But what's that got to do with your being a nobody?”, quizzed father bear.

Uncle Bade clarified, "Somehow we tend to get locked up in two things - first, our assumed roles and second, expectations we think people have from us. Often the second emanating from the first. Which means we operate from outside.
”But if”, as Bholu says, “we are nobody, then having nothing to prove, we simply look at our strengths. Hence, we operate from inside - our strengths, which can be constantly evolving. The same mango tree can then be a source of wood, or shelter or nesting sites and so on.”

”But we do need to be somebody, don't we, to be able to operate well in life, to be able to achieve?”, piped in mummy bear.

"Let me give an example," replied Uncle Bade, "We know BHolu likes maths. 
But both of you - his parents - think that he is very good in Math.
Now, by chance, if he gets less marks in a test - then Bholu feels disappointed. He may then work harder or he could resort to other means to somehow score better, or he may tell you lies and so on. The reason for disappointment is not less score in the test, but that the score should match up to the image that you carry about Bholu and which you have tranferred to him.”

”But what if, Bholu and both of you just think that one of the thing that Bholu likes doing is Math. Then even if he scores less, without getting disappointed, he may want to do the sums again or learn in another way to solve them or even skip learning them.”

"Then it also doesn't matter how much my friend Chimpu gets", adds Bholu.

"Liking and enjoying are in the "present state" and hence more about the task and less about the person. While tags like "good at", being "future" oriented are more about the person and hence the struggle to live upto the image," said uncle Bade.

"So you mean, to ensure effective learning, we need to focus on the task as separate from the person," said the mummy bear.

"Oh yes, you have hit the nail on the head. We call this as PROCESS based learning, where the process of learning is far more important than the result. Realize that the process is about the task - the interaction between the learner and the learning, while the result is about the person - the ability of learner to produce the desired end," explained Uncle Bade.

Now Bholu was very excited, "Uncle Bade, is it same as how you said that I was neither “creative”, nor “not creative’. I am simply someone who uses creativity some times and does not use it other times".

"Exactly! The moment I think creativity is about me or the results I produce, there are three problems:

One, on the basis of my results, I start evaluating myself as 'creative' or 'not creative'. If I judge myself to be 'not creative', I am unnecessarily putting a serious limitation on myself. If I judge, I am creative, and if others assess any of my work as "not creative" - I get hurt and either fret or fight or both! Two, I spend too much time trying to get others to see me the way I think they should see me, while, I would be better off focusing on the task itself. Three, and most important of all, instead of open to others comments as feedback, I usually defend it as a criticism and hence am mostly closed to learning.

"The image becomes the result we want to fuel". father bear now understood,

"Exactly, if we focus on the process of creativity and enjoy it, we learn more, grow more and achieve more".

”But this way, won't we all take more time to learn?”, mother bear worried.

”But mummy, since I am nobody, I am not in a hurry to be somebody”, argued Bholu.

”I get it. Time becomes a pressure only if we are trying to prove the person behind it, rather then the learning behind it", replied clearer mummy bear.

”I think we are all much clearer about this "image" which blocks the process and forces us to focus on the results. But true freedom to learn is in realizing that the result is binding, while process is liberating.”, said Uncle Bade.

Meet me, I am Bholu the Bear, a nobody, who doesn't try to be somebody, just enjoys learning everything and from everybody.