---
layout: chapter
title: To Yield or Not to Yield
permalink: yield
category: discipline
published: true
---

**My daughter wants to have her food only in the special bowl that her aunt had brought instead of the plate in which I gave her. I was tempted to get the plate for her.** Then I wondered if acceding to simple demands would spoil her? But then, not respecting her requests and denying her the importance can damage her self-esteem. Some parents decide in favour of the child, while some take the sterner stance.

Most parents try to balance in between, acceding sometimes and denying other times. However, does this inconsistency leaves the child confused? Maybe the child starts to appear DEMANDING in the wake of uncertain response and just tries her luck every time. Some parents also accede to demands in the name of love.

Aren’t we teaching children that love means getting other people to take care of your demands? Worse will be the case when agreeing to demands is used as rewards and denials as punishments – for that is teaching manipulation to the child.

Let’s explore what we can do to ease this pressure vis-à-vis self-esteem. So, while the child is confused, balancing his or her demands leaves the parents exasperated. Let’s work on some suggestions to manage this. We will take two examples: one situation described at the beginning, another of a teenager demanding to go for a late night party. The whole approach is to let the child fulfill his own desires and take his own decisions. If the child makes the decisions, he is more open to accept the consequences thereafter. 

**1) Kick off with questions** – Don’t ask “why”, instead ask “what” and “how” questions.

To the small child:

“If you want the special bowl, what do you need to get it?”

“If the bowl is kept at a height, how can you reach there?”

To the elder child:

“If you want to go to a late night party, what are your mother’s concerns?”

“How can you ensure that you come back in time?”

“How will you ensure that your homework does not suffer?”

**2) Offer choices** – The key is that they take their own decision.

_To the small child:_

“Can you get the special bowl yourself, or you want me to serve the next meal in that bowl. (If none of the choices are acceptable, keep adding more choices at a time – be creative).

“Do you want help with the chair, or maybe you eat sitting in a different place?”

_To the elder child:_

“You want to go to one party and stay really late, or go to next one also
but come back within time from both."

**3) Inform them of consequences**, without threatening them.

_To the small child:_

“Remember you will also have to keep your special bowl back in the sink. 

_To the elder child:_

“If you come too late that worries your mother and I really get concerned."

**4) Have faith in your child** and lovely label them.

_To the small child:_

“I think you can easily get the bowl. You are so smart."

_To the elder child:_

“I know you are responsible and you will take the right decision."

Finally, be kind and firm. Firm towards the needs of the situation and kind towards the needs of the child. This ensures consistency in your communication also.

Remember, a bird learns to fly only when she is left to fulfill her demands of food herself. A parent only supports and encourages, doesn't do the flying for her.