---
layout: chapter
title: Freedom to Learn
permalink: freedom
category: play and learn
--- 

Where the mind is without fear and the head is held high;
Where knowledge is free;
Where the world has not been broken up into fragments by narrow
domestic walls;
Where words come out from the depth of truth;
Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards perfection;
Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its way into the
dreary desert sand of dead habit;
Where the mind is led forward by thee into ever-widening thought
and action--
Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my country awake.

-- Rabindranath Tagore

Do we need to say more?

Freedom to learn, to many of us, conjures up a whole lot of positives images of freedom of what to learn, how to learn, when to learn, pace of learning, from whom to learn, where to learn and even not to learn and so on ... which leads us to conclude that freedom means that learning happens through PULL and not PUSH. 
So what brings in this pull? What does it need us to focus on? What will lead to this freedom? Some thoughts:

Freedom to learn means that we TRUST the child with the task of learning.
Trust that, the child wants to learn, has a desire to learn, and that he or she will learn. She may first learn it wrong, but will sooner or later make it right; that failing or succeeding are just two ways of learning, one not necessarily better than the other; and that the child has the power and the required resourcefulness to learn. Just like we trusted the child in learning how to walk: we waited on him, we let him fall, we cheered him when he stood up again - can we trust him with all his learning?

In some way we all do trust our children - but specifically we do not always TRUST their ABILITY TO LEARN and perhaps that is why we point out their mistakes too soon, we try and teach them too soon even if they do not want to, we come in too soon with "shoulds", this is the way, etc. We often do not wait for the learning to come to them as a natural process.

Freedom to learn means that we are ALLOWED to be INCOMPLETE (or imperfect).
Lets say a child is learning counting and while saying aloud he counts till '8' and then stops. My observation is that most of us would want the child to finish till 10, in fact many us would actually goad him to complete this till 10. This is very surprising, because the child is not trying to complete anything, least complete learning. He is not trying to finish one class after other or one curriculum after another. For him eight is as much a milestone as 10 is. He in fact is just enjoying the process of counting and hence stops wherever he wants.

Somehow, we think time is a crunch. Also we think learning is linear (thats the way our school system is). But at any point of time a child is actually simultaneously learning say 100 things - all incomplete - say learning to say thank you, learning to dance, to multiply, to tie a knot, to cycle, to pronounce a word and so on....and given that we can stay with this incompleteness, the child will finally learn most of these and more importantly will continue to enjoy the process.

Freedom to learn means that I am RESPONSIBLE for learning.
Freedom in variably brings in responsibility. When we offer freedom to children with the onus too, this becomes an exciting challenge to them. The child then realizes - on his own - how important, useful, credential building is this whole process of learning. Then he starts learning for the real reason of learning, not for some external marks, awards or pressure or expectations.
This also fuels the desire to learn, to grow, to change, to adapt, and to excel.

Freedom to learn means that we learn for the JOY of learning.
Learning at its highest form is done without any specific purpose. It isn't done because I will, at the end, do X with my leaning, but its done for the sheer joy of learning itself, for the pleasure one gets while exploring, knowing, trying, doing etc. Learning which - since it comes from within - the curious energy to learn - is not predetermined. Then there is no result waiting at the end, there is no assessment, there is nothing except me at the beginning, during the process and at the end. Me is the learning, growing and glowing from this joy.

A child of one year old exploring a kitchen cupboard, a six year old building a huge sand castle, a teen who is learning to play the guitar, a couple who is learning cha-cha-cha dance or a grand father exploring a computer are all experiencing this sheer spiritual bliss!

A Zen Teacher saw four of his students return from the market, riding their bicycles. When they had dismounted, the teacher asked the students,

"Why are you riding your bicycles?"

The first student replied, "The bicycle is carrying this sack of potatoes. I am glad that I do not have to carry them on my back!"

The teacher praised the student, saying, "You are a smart boy. When you grow old, you will not walk hunched over, as I do."

The second student replied, "I love to watch the trees and fields pass by as I roll down the path."

The teacher commended the student, "Your eyes are open and you see the world."

The third student answered, "Riding my bicycle, I live in harmony with all beings."

The teacher was pleased and said, "You are riding on the golden path of non-harming."

The fourth student replied, "I ride my bicycle to ride my bicycle."

The teacher went and sat at the feet of the fourth student, and said, "I am your disciple."
 

 

 