---
layout: chapter
title: The Myth of Rewards
permalink: reward
category: myth
published: true
---

An old hunchback was constantly teased and abused by the neighborhood children. One day he told them that each will get Rs10 for teasing and abusing him for one hour every day. Kids were overjoyed and did the worst teasing and abusing possible. After few days the old man informed that now onwards they would be getting Rs 5 per day for their job. Still kids were happy and did their job well. The next day the old man revised the rate to Rs 2 and children were clearly disappointed. Some dropped out. Finally the next day the old man said that now onwards he is stopping these payments. Children stopped teasing and abusing.

Next time, before you offer your child a reward for a certain 'good' behaviour, think about this story.

Is discipline about identifying the behaviors that you want (clean room, less TV, being nice or being quiet, etc), then to reward the positive behavior and punish the negative ones? In which case I soon determine which rewards are worth the 'good' behavior and go for it and which are not worth it and accept punishment for them (with resentment though).

Moreover, if a reward is connected to certain behavior it implies a hidden punishment. You see, not getting the reward is in itself a punishment. 

According to us rewards create more problems than solutions - both for the parents and for the child. 

1. "Finish your homework by 5 and you will get to see the cartoon show". Rewards create uncertainty in the mind of the child. "Will I get it or not" This creates anxiety and distress which impairs creativity and problem solving skills. It kills an opportunity for learning.

2. "If you sit quietly in the car, I'll buy you a chocolate". Bribes only make children put value to their behavior. Next time you want them to do something, the response will be "what do I get?" or simply "what for?" This typically poses another problem - soon the last reward becomes small and demand is made for bigger rewards. "Give me two" or "Buy me that toy also" etc. 

3. "If you finish all your food, you will get the ice cream." Rewards make control of child's behavior 'external' (in adult's hand). It feels like manipulation. Moreover, remove the control and out goes the behavior. Use this litmus test - leave your child on his own and watch how he behaves - does he eat his food or straight goes for the ice cream? 

4. "You will get a cycle if you get 90 in the final exams". So who cares about learning, let me just see how can I get 90. Rewards interfere with the real reason for doing something. Unable to achieve it, the child doesn't rue the lack of marks, but the loss of reward!

Connecting rewards to disciplining gives control to parents. But is parenting about control? Is parenting about getting the child to do what you want?Or is it about making the child want what is good for him or her. Perhaps it’s more challenging than putting a carrot in front of the pony but more rewarding in the long run. So is disciplining about giving the leash itself to the horse?

Remove rewards from the equation, and you substitute them with intrinsic motivation. This leads to self-discipline. Million times more effective!